---
title: Shell Survival Guide
description: Covers a basic set of commands to help you get work done in the shell.
layout: post
---

Now that we've covered how to get around the filesystem a bit and how commands
actually work, let's get a bit more hands on. You'll need a separate set of
tools for each general type of operating you need to do. For instance

  - Creating, changing, and removing files and directories
  - Looking for information in files
  - Processing information once we have it

This document should be more example heavy and less explanation oriented, so
expect to be testing commands when reading this.

For each new command that's introduced, open up the man page and read the
'**NAME**' and '**SYNOPSIS**' sections, and the beginning of the
'**DESCRIPTION**' sections.  As always, the man page may make no sense, in
which case just google the command.

Basic File Manipulation
-----------------------

We'll need a new set of commands to modify files and directories. Pull up the
man page for each of these commands to get a feel for what it does. Try to find
one interesting thing for each command.

- - -

These commands are some of the basic operations you'll be used to - move, copy,
and delete files and directories.

  * **cp** - copy files and directories
  * **mv** - move and rename files and directories (sensing a trend?)
  * **mkdir** - make a new directory
  * **rmdir** - remove *empty* directories
  * **rm** - remove files and directories

- - -

In addition, Unix makes very heavy use of text files to configure things. In
fact, one of the main ways that you'll be working with the system and creating
files is through a text editor, so you'll be using an editor a *lot*. You have
many editors to chose from, although I'm only going to list two here.

  * **nano** - A basic and fairly intuitive file editor you can use to create
    and edit files. For now, this is a good editor that will get you started and
    working.
  * **vim** - Otherwise known as Vi Improved, this is an extremely powerful
    editor. It's a less intuitive than nano, but in the long run you'll want to
    switch to an editor that's a bit more capable than nano, such as vim. For more
    information on vim, see the [learning unix page on vim](../../tools/vim/).

In Practice
-----------

TODO exercises

Looking for information
-----------------------

A lot of your time is going to be spent looking for things. Since the average
system has gigabytes of programs, configuration files, and other information,
you'll need to be able to pull this information out of the system so you can
work with it.

### Finding Files

  * **locate** - does fast lookups of file names on the system
  * **find** - does a slower but more precise and tunable search for files
  * **which** - Returns the full path for a given program name
  * **grep** search files by their content

### Inspecting files

  * **ls** - ls is a very handy tool for getting information like the owner,
    the size, time created, and other information about a file
  * **file** - determine the type of file
  * **du** - disk usage, shows how much disk space files and directories consume
  * **df** - displays disk space for hard disks

### People

  * **who** - displays a list of users that are actively logged on
  * **finger** - shows user information for a user, like fille
  * **id** - provides access information for a user, like numeric uid and groups

Processing information
----------------------

Once you actually have the information that you need, you may need to modify it
so that it's more useful to you.

  * **grep** - grep has been mentioned already, but it's good for both finding
    and manipulating information.
  * **wc** - word count: list the lines, characters, and sizes of files
  * **sort** - sort files, both [asciibetical][asciibetical] and numerically
  * **uniq** - remove duplicated lines in a file that are one after the other
  * **tr** - transliterate, or substitute one set of characters for another
  * **head** - returns the first part of a file
  * **tail** - returns the last part of a file

[asciibetical]: http://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia_term/0,2542,t=ASCIIbetical&i=38025,00.asp "PC Magazine - ASCIIbetical order"

- - -

There are a couple of tools that are significantly more complex than the above
listed programs. Using these require more knowledge than just a quick scan of
the man page, so they're worth investigating on their own. For now don't worry
too much about them, but know that if you need to do some fairly complex changes
to some data, you may want to look here.

  * **sed** - `ed` was one of the first editors, and sed is a programmatic
    version of this. That is, sed is designed to run a specified set of commands
    on its input. For more information see [the sed FAQ][sed].
  * **awk** - awk is both a tool and a programming language for that tool that
    is designed to process text. See the [awk book][awk] for more information.
  * **ruby** - Ruby is a distant descendant of awk, and supports a surprising
    proportion of operations awk does, but is much more readable. See the [tools
    page on ruby][ruby] for more information.

[sed]: http://sed.sourceforge.net/sedfaq.html "The sed FAQ"
[awk]: http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/AWK "Wikibooks - awk"
[ruby]: ../../tools/ruby/ "Learning Unix: Ruby"

Intermediate File Manipulation
------------------------------

  * **tar**
  * **gzip**
