---
title: Understanding the Shell
layout: post
---

This far we've been treating the shell as a bit of a black box. You type things
in, you get output, and things are linked together as necessary to make the
system run. Now let's dig into the guts of what's happening to see how we go
from typing in text to getting actual work done.

Making sense from text
----------------------

To get started, we need to get the input typed in from the user and figure out
what exactly is needed. When you type in a line of input, your shell receives
it, and has to [parse][wiki_parse] the string into directives.

For instance, if you run the command `grep bee /usr/share/dict/words | less`,
the shell has to determine what you want. In this instance, it needs to
determine that you want to run two commands, `grep` and `less`, and that the
standard output of grep needs to be directed to the standard input of less.

In general, before anything can happen, the shell needs handle all the special
things we've been doing, like chaining commands with `|`, handling redirections
like `<` and `>`, replacing variables like `$var` with the contents of those
variables, and so on.

Once this is done, the user's input has been broken up into information the
shell can use, such as the list of programs that need to be run and any sort of
modifications that need to be made, such as redirecting the output and joining
commands with pipes.

While all shells may have different methods of parsing, a general overview of
the [bash parser][parser] can give you a more exact idea of how shells exactly
do parsing.

[wiki_parse]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsing "Wikipedia: Parsing"
[parser]: http://mywiki.wooledge.org/BashParser "The Bash Parser"

How Commands Get Executed
-------------------------

Shell Builtins
--------------

You may have noticed that there are some commands like `cd`, `alias`, or
`export` that are referred to as 'builtins'. Due to how the model of processes
and how things are isolated in unix, there are a variety of operations that
cannot be separate commands, so they have to be built into the shell. Because
these commands are built into the shell, they don't follow the previously given
model for execution. Instead, when you run one of those commands the shell
itself simply executes the instructions itself.

For instance, one process can't change the current directory of another process,
so `cd` can't be an independent program. When you run `cd`, it invokes some
internal behavior in the shell, which makes it change the directory itself. The
same thing goes for environment variables - you can't change the environment
variables in a process from another process, so you can use the `export` builtin
to have a shell change a variable for itself.

For a full list of builtins, you can do `man builtin` but be warned - this is a
very long and somewhat unreadable man page of *all* the shell builtins. You
would be best to look up information on the internet regarding these commands.

Job Control
-----------

  * Suspending
  * Foregrounding and Backgrounding
  * &
  * disown

  * Comparison to screen

Information at a Glance
-----------------------

AKA the prompt

Work More, Type Less
--------------------

[link](http://tldp.org/LDP/Bash-Beginners-Guide/html/sect_03_04.html)

  * Parameter Expansion
  * Variable Expansion
  * Command Substitution

  * Tab Completion

  * [history expansion](http://www.acm.uiuc.edu/workshops/zsh/history/hist_expn.html)
