Learning Unix
===================

Or

Happy Fun Unix Time
-------------------

Introduction
------------

These are meant to be a series of exercises to help you explore our environment,
try out new things, and learn.

At any point if you are uncertain, use google, ask a fellow zombie or a more
senior cat, or pm finch for help. The goal of this is to learn by whatever
method that works for you.

If you stumble upon a concept that doesn't make sense or have not heard of, it's
fine to move past it. There's a lot to learn so don't let small details slow you
down. Try to absorb as much as you can.

If there is a section that says 'send details to me,' this means I'm actively
interested in your response and want your feedback or I want to see what you've
found. If you would be so kind, write up the things you find or work through in
this and then send me a copy when you're done. This way, I can improve these
happy fun unix times to make them more happy, fun, unix, and time.

This site is actively under development.

Conventions
-----------

Commands that you should run will be styled like `whoami`. Parts of the
command that you should change will be enclosed in brackets, so `id [your
account]` would be `id finch` for finch.

More conventions to follow.

Index
-----

These are in various stages of completion. If it isn't done yet, either come
back later and pester me to finish a specific section.

  1. [Navigating in the shell](001-navigation/) (Still cleaning this up)
  2. [Redirection and the Tao of Unix](002-redirection/) (Stubbed out)
  3. [Scripting](003-scripting/) (Partially done)
  4. [Processes, or lack thereof.](004-processes/) (Stubbed out)

TODO
----


Speculative topics
------------------

  1. Manipulating files and directories
   * mkdir
   * cp
   * mv
   * rm
   * nano
  2. Job control
   * suspend
   * bg
   * fg
   * jobs
   * &
   * disown
  3. Permissions
  4. Users and groups
  5. Filesystems
  6. Playing with ttys
  7. Regular expressions

If there's something that I haven't written about that isn't listed here and
you would like to learn more about it, let me know.

Tools of the trade
------------------

 - [Vim](tools/vim/): Vim and vimtutor. Learn you some vim!
 - Eventually: ssh
 - Eventually: git
 - Eventually: procmail
