---
title: Introduction
---

Introduction
============

These are meant to be a series of exercises to help you explore our environment,
try out new things, and learn.

At any point if you are uncertain, use google, ask a fellow zombie or a more
senior cat, or pm finch for help. The goal of this is to learn by whatever
method that works for you.

If you stumble upon a concept that doesn't make sense or have not heard of, it's
fine to move past it. There's a lot to learn so don't let small details slow you
down. Try to absorb as much as you can.

If there is a section that says 'send details to me,' this means I'm actively
interested in your response and want your feedback or I want to see what you've
found. If you would be so kind, write up the things you find or work through in
this and then send me a copy when you're done. This way, I can improve these
happy fun unix times to make them more happy, fun, unix, and time.

Conventions
-----------

In order to make things clearer, I'll be adopting a few conventions.

Commands that you should run will be styled like `whoami`. Parts of the
command that you should change will be enclosed in brackets, so `id [your
account]` would be `id finch` for finch.

There are going to be two styles of code blocks. One is going to be for
code examples, like ruby, bash, or C. These should just look like code.
Hopefully I'll add syntax highlighting to make these more visible.

TODO add syntax highlighting to CSS

    #!/bin/bash

    echo "This would be an example of a code block, or code snippet."

The other style will be the output from a shell, so something that I typed in
and ran, and copied the commands and output here.

    % echo "This would be an example of command output"
    This would be an example of command output
    % echo "The % is called the prompt, and it's just the input that's before where I type."
    The % is called the prompt, and it's just the input that's before where I type.

- - -

In general, if I give you some code to execute, avoid copying and pasting it.
Writing code and typing out the symbols and words will make the code a bit less
foreign if you really have to inspect it, so while it may take a little bit
longer you'll gain a richer understanding of it.
