--- 
title: Introduction to the Command Line
---

Introduction to the Command Line
=======================

Description
-----------

This happy fun unix time will show you how to get around a unix system, look
at files, and run some basic programs.

/cat is the location that cat specific documents, programs, and other
miscellaneous files are stored. It's been around for a very long time, so there
are some old relics of times past. We'll explore this to get some real world
experience.

Commands
--------

From here on out, you should be doing this from a cat machine. Connect to
ruby.cat.pdx.edu via putty and work from there.

Before you ride into battle against this happy fun unix time, know your weapons.
Open the man page for each one of the commands by doing "man command"; for
instance "man ls" will bring up the man page for ls. Read a bit; man pages can
be extremely dense, jargon filled, and unclear so if you lose interest, move on.
Try to read a bit of the description at the least.

  - ls: list files and directories
    - This command has an obscene amount of flags. Skim through, find one that
      is interesting/useful/odd/something, and explain it to me.
  - pwd: print the working directory, or 'where we are'
  - cat: takes files and prints them out together
  - less: a 'pager', or program that displays parts of a file at a time
  - nano: a user friendly editor
  - file: shows what type a file is, EG a document, music file, or executable binary

cd is a special command; it's called a shell builtin. It isn't a standard
program but actually a tool that is built into your shell. If you can't find the
man page for it, you can consult http://ss64.com/bash/cd.html

- - -


Your homedir
------------
# TODO

The filesystem
--------------
# TODO

Running programs
----------------

Inspecting files
----------------

/cat/doc
--------

Commands that you should run will be enclosed in back quotes, like `whoami`.
Parts of the command that you should change will be enclosed in brackets, so `id
[your account]` would be `id finch` for finch.

Start off by doing `cd /cat/doc`. Do `ls` here. This is where we store general
documents like signs and forms.

Do `cd /cat/doc/meetings`. Do `ls` to see all the current agendas.

Print out the dog agenda with `cat agenda.dog`. This might take a while.

Do `pwd`, then `cd old`, then `pwd`. See how our location in the filesystem
changed. Do `ls` to look at the old agendas. do `cat [agenda]` on a few agenda
files to see what we used to be up to. Do `ls -l` to see when these files were
made.

Do `cd ..` to go back to /cat/doc/meetings. Do `nano agenda.dog` to open up the
dog agenda. Use the up and down arrows to move through the file. Scroll down to
Fri Sep 05 1997 and tell me who was absent that Friday. When you're done, quit
nano using ctrl+x. If you accidentally edit the file, don't try to save it.

/cat/bin
--------

Do `cd /cat/bin`. This is where we store random tools that should be shared. Do
`ls` to see what tools are available. Do `ls -l` to see the dates on the files.

Pick a few files in this directory, and do `file [filename]` to see what kind of
file it is. If you see anything like "ELF 32-bit MSB executable," don't try to
cat or nano it. If you see something like "shell script text executable" or
anything with "text" in it, you can open it with nano or cat. Open a few files,
with cat or nano, look at their contents, and be sure not to save any edits.

Some of the files you can open are fairly elaborate scripts. Try to find the
simpler files, like `akimbo` or `why`.

To remind us where we are, do `pwd` to see where we are, then run `./akimbo` and
`./why`. Also do `/cat/bin/why` and compare this. Remember the significance of
'.' and '..'. If you don't recall, ask.

Find something interesting in this directory. Send details to me.

I've thrown a few gag programs into /cat/bin. Use ls with the long listing flag 
to find which of these files I've created. If you don't know how to do the long
listing, check the man page or ask for help. Send me the names of the files 
I've made.

- - -

Extra credit
------------

Hunner and Kennobaka are a pair of old splatnix claws that have since found
greener pastures, but back in the day they wrote a lot of code. Go to their
homedirs, /home/linux/hunner, /home/solaris/hunner, /home/linux/fellina, and
home/solaris/fellina, and find something interesting.

Hints:

  - /home/linux/fellina/printers
  - /home/linux/hunner/scripts

Moar extra credit
-----------------

Find the secret agenda.

Super fun omg extra credit
--------------------------

Due to a strange series of events, most solaris machines share a common
/usr/local. It has some old stuff. Really old. ssh to scalpel.cat.pdx.edu, `cd
/usr/local` and find something REALLY old. The older the better. The weirder the
better. Report back to me.

Hint: the find command can be used to search file files by type and time last
modified.
