Happy fun unix time, vim edition
================================

> "Everyone's first vim session: ^C^C^X^X^X^XquitqQ!qwtf[esc]qwertyuiopasdfghjkl;:xwhat"

Description
-----------

Vim is the descendant of one of the first editors, 'ed'. It's tremendously
powerful, extremely versatile, supremely extendable, and once you're familiar
with it you can get work done significantly faster. I've been using vim for over
five years, and I still learn tricks that make me faster and more efficient.

Vim uses some fairly advanced constructs and approaches to editing, which makes
it incredibly powerful.  However, this power means a bit of added complexity,
and the default controls aren't immediately intuitive. You may have used nano,
which displays shortcuts for commonly used options on the screen, while vim
doesn't do this. This means that if you accidentally got into vim, it made
almost no sense. *Don't despair!* It's actually rather easy to learn vim if you
take things incrementally, and before you know it you'll be blazing through
files.

To help overcome this initial difficulty, there's a tool you can (and should)
run called `vimtutor`. This launches vim in an environment where it guides you
through examples and demonstrates the features of vim in a place where you have
immediate feedback - vim itself.

Why Should You Care?
--------------------

You've got to ask, "Why should I waste my time learning some obscure commands
just to edit files? Nano does just fine!" The response to this is coupled with
the nature and philosophy of Unix. In Unix systems, almost everything is file,
and easily readable. You will spend vast amounts of time in an editor, either
editing configuration files, writing code, or modifying output files. In fact,
your file editor is arguably one of the most important tools you have for
interacting with your system.

If we're so reliant on an editor to view and interact with the system, wouldn't
we want the most powerful editor available to do this? The reality is that while
nano is great for getting started because it's so simple, this simplicity means
that you have less power and control, and so you have to spend more time getting
simple things done. This time spent on simple things distract you from more
important tasks. While vim is admittedly more complex, it saves you from
spending time on tedious, mundane work so that you can focus on the real tasks
at hand. Once you get over the initial barrier vim will be one of the tools that
you *must* have in order to work.

TODO talk more of vim's features? Addons? Bees?

References
----------

 * [The vim learning curve is a myth](http://robots.thoughtbot.com/post/13164810557/the-vim-learning-curve-is-a-myth)
 * [Prescription vim](http://rxvim.tumblr.com/) Read one page of the vim help pages a week, and call me when you've become a vim god.
